I’ll call her my battle angel, this evangelion.
Seraphic herald of the ninth echelon,
pleromatic aeon demanding a founding gnosis,
her voice electric tekhelet, Septuagint, a two-leaved door
opening onto porches, chambers, and courts,
her voice a Solomonic column of barley sugar.

She’s why I’m crazy.
She’s why I can’t sleep. She’s why I never
sleep. She’s why I avoid people.
She’s why I drill the eight limbs with the mud-step,
why I walk the octagon of trigrams inscribed on Wudang,
why I practice the Spiral Ox Jaw and the Tiger’s Mouth.
She’s why I’m hard to live with
and why I say,

The bread that rises in a house that fails,
The Word, father of zero and one,
is our advocate.

A shut eye we name Beginning,
The Word sleeps,
and all is darkness.

An open eye
we name The Treasure,
The Word wakes
and voices are heard among the sounds of water.

The Word dreams, and worlds appear.
And stars beyond and behind our eyes.
And the moon with its hair tied up
and its hair let down.

Bound on every side,
and wide open in the center,
The Word hosts our breath, our span, the space
of our dreaming and our thinking,
our stillness and our moving. And the emerging present
is one of its bodies.

The fulcrum, the eye, the heart enthroned,
the dove without person, homing, The Word

is a hammer raining down its songs,
a river pouring out of the mouth of the anvil.

Twin and unlike, The Word is without peer.
Black and white, it is a wheeling pair
of coincident opposites turning on a point:
Existence and Nonexistence hand in hand.
Substance and Void begetting life and death.

The Word is an open book,
and its first and last pages are missing.

It is a brother and sister
telling each other
the missing parts
of one another’s stories.

It is the lover and the beloved
constantly changing places in the fire.

And it is the wind in the treetops
outside our window,
a voice torn to pieces. Hear it?

The wind without a house, she says.
Time without a gate, she says.
A memory of the ocean
torments the trees,
a homesickness, she says.

The wind is leafing through both of our histories,
looking for a happy ending.

It is my hand moving over your body, I say,
finding more and more to know.

It is a circle of women
reciting in the round
the oldest stories of Death disguised as a traveler
or overlooked familiar, friend we shunned
for less faithful playmates.

It is a house,
and from inside come the voices of children
taking turns reading to one another.
It is their own story they read.

But why do their voices seem uneasy?
Does the moon, giant
at the window, frighten them?

Does death run amok through all
the pages of the story?
Do the pages turn by themselves?
Are there strangers in the house?
Is the house burning?

Soldiers with guns are at our door again.
Sister, quick. Change into a penny.
I’ll fold you in a handkerchief,
put you in my pocket,
and jump inside a sack of rice,
one of the uncooked kernels.

Men with knives are looking in our windows again.
Brother, hurry. Turn yourself
into one of our mother’s dolls
sitting on the living room shelf. I’ll be the dust
settling on your eyelids.

The ones wearing wings are in the yard.

The ones adorned with lightning are in the house.

The ones decorated with stars
are dividing our futures among them.

Don’t answer when they call to us in the voice of Nanny.

Don’t believe them when they promise sugar.

Don’t come out until evening,
or when you hear our mother weeping to herself.

If only I could become the mirror in her purse,
I’d never come back until the end of time.

